***
Note: If the site has a main page and sub-pages, then Trickster seems like a logical choice. Here is some textual content for this type of page.
***

As with other sections of this site, readers can browse various collections, annotate the texts, and assemble collections for scholarly use. You can simply browse through the myths or use the information below for context that may help structure your exploration. 
***

Coyote (also Old Man Coyote) is an important character in Native American mythology, particularly for tribal nations across the Southwest and Great Basin regions of the United States. The Coyote myths on this site were collected by anthropologists in the early 20th century. In their original context, the individual myths were often part of larger collections, included in book-length studies of a particular culture's folklore. See, for example, [*Folktales of the Salishan and Sahaptin Tribes*,](https://archive.org/stream/folktalesofsalis00boas#page/n7/mode/2up) a collection published in 1917 that is replete with Coyote's deeds and misdeeds. 

Coyote is a particularly intriguing figure because he combines the culture hero and the trickster, two mythic archetypes not often seen in a single character. For example, in some texts, readers will find that Coyote brings fire to the people—at great peril to his own well-being; in others, he loses his eyes while playing a game he learned from birds; in still another, he fakes his own death so that he can return and marry one of his daughters. Robert Lowie, a contemporary of Franz Boas, describes the role confusion in his introduction to [*Myths and Traditions of the Crow Indians* (1918)] (https://archive.org/details/mythsandtraditi00lowigoog):  

>There is no attempt to bring order into the chaotic assemblage of supernatural and heroic beings. Old-Man-Coyote not only figures at different times as transformer, trickster, and founder of customs but changes his character even in the same part of his cycle.

In addition to Coyote’s contradictory character, these myths are part of an oral tradition, so the tales are best imagined as part of a relationship between the narrator and the audience. Different narrators will disagree about content. In the same introduction, Lowie describes two narrators who vehemently disagree about the activities of a given character and the outcome of a particular myth.  Thus, it is useful to recognize that the textual product seen here and in other collections is a static  representation a dynamic tradition. In this way, Coyote stories are more like family stories—told and retold as fits the occasion—than they are like literary works designed for the printed page. 

Coyote myths may strike some readers as enigmatic, in part because the myths bear only distant resemblance to the iconic animal stories of Western literature (e.g., the Big Bad Wolf, found in the Grimm Brothers “Little Red Cap” (“Little Red Riding Hood”) or Joseph Jacobs’ “Three Little Pigs.”) The animal characters in these narratives exist in an allegorical world that resembles our own in many respects. Coyote myths are different, in part, because they concern time and relationships more so than allegory and etiology. Of course readers will find symbolic value in Coyote myths. Likewise, some myths provide an explicit origin for a quality in the present.  For example, in the eye juggler myths, Coyote’s eyes are often replaced with pitch or resin. It is said that this is why coyotes have yellow eyes. However, the overarching purpose of the myth is not to explain the coyote’s eye color. Rather, the myths connect readers to a time when the world itself had a different, albeit still recognizable form. 

This connection involves a significant culture shift for most Western readers. [Franz Boas points out that Native American mythology does not portray creation as seen in the Book of Genesis] (http://www.jstor.org/stable/534740), wherein God creates the heavens and the earth, which were “formless and empty” until they were made otherwise. In contrast to Genisis-inspired narratives of creation, readers will often find narratives of emergence in which the world already exists and takes different shapes at different points in time. See, for example, *Diné Bahaneʼ*, the Navajo “Story of the People.” Boas defines Native American myths as part of a continuum between myth and history. Myths, for Boas, were those stories dealing with a world before our own.  Human and nonhuman animals communicated easily, and their actions brought the characteristics of the present world into being.  For example, "The Story of Emergence" in Washington Matthews 1897 collection [*Navajo Legends*] (https://archive.org/details/agy7773.0001.001.umich.edu). In this verion, Coyote and Badger appear when the earth and sky meet. Shortly thereafter, Coyote brings death into the world:

>When they reached the mainland they sought to divine their fate. To do this some one threw a hide-scraper into the water, saying: "If it sinks we perish, if it floats we live." It floated, and all rejoiced. But Coyote said: "Let me divine your fate." He picked up a stone, and saying, "If it sinks we perish; if it floats we live," he threw it into the water. It sank, of course, and all were angry with him and reviled him; but he answered them saying : "If we all live, and continue to increase as we have done, the earth will soon be too small to hold us, and there will be no room for the cornfields. It is better that each of us should live but a time on this earth and then leave and make room for our children." They saw the wisdom of his words and were silent. 

Boas describes a second class of stories that concern history, which describe the present-day world.  The mythical status of a narrative, therefore, is less about the characters—Coyote the trickster, Hummingbird the great hunter—and more about the relationship between the narrative and the world. The dividing line between myth and history is more porous than one might expect: Personified animals can appear in histories, just as we can be transported into myth. If we follow Boas' distinction, the incident cited above would concern history, not myth, becuase it occurs in the fifth (and present) world. The result is that myths have a power and resonence that fairy tales do not. For example, in *Navajo Legends,* Matthews notes that his narrator rushed through the creation myth at a pace and with an impatience that was not typical of other conversations: 

>[The Narrator] arrived early; he remained late; he hastened through his meals; he showed evidence of worry at all delays and interruptions, and frequently begged me to postpone minor explanations. On being urged to explain this change of spirit he said that we were travelling in the land of the dead, in a place of evil and potent ghosts, just so long as he continued to relate those parts of the myth which recount the adventures of his ancestors in the nether world, and that we were in danger so long as our minds remained there.; but that when we came to that part of the tale where the people ascend to this—the fifth and last world—we need no longer feel uneasy and could then take our time.

